---
layout: article
title: Error Detection
mode: immersive
header:
  theme: dark
article_header:
  type: overlay
  theme: dark
  background_color: '#4c4cc2'
  background_image:
    gradient: 'linear-gradient(313deg, rgba(2,0,36, .3) 0%, rgba(76,76,194, .3) 47%, rgba(0,212,255, .6) 100%)'
    src: https://github.com/alexma2344/peperina/blob/master/assets/images/don-ripper.jpg?raw=true"
sharing: true
comment: true
mathjax: true
mathjax_autoNumber: true
articles:
  excerpt_type: html
tags: computer-networks
---

<!--more-->

---

## Intro

The chances of errors on the transmissions over the network are always present. Physical damage on a cable/NIC, Malitious corruption of data, EMI, etc.

Imagine that the packets we send and receive usually have to go through our local network, an extensive ISP maintained physical medium, trough different jumps on internet nodes, and to the server located on a remote infrastructure.

**eg** Making a wire transfer and having bits flipped in transit. Could have a huge impact on the outcome of the operation.

The following are some error detection (ED) algorithms used to address the above. Each of them very differnt from the other.
- Checksums
- Cyclic redundancy codes (CRCs)
- Message authentication codes (MACs)

Ethernet and TLS appends ED to the payload. 

***f(Data) = ED***


Whereas IP prepends a checksum on its header.

***ED = f(Data)***


## Checksum

It adds up all the values in the packet (IP,TCP)

<a class="button button--success button--rounded button--xs" href="">PROS</a> Fast and cheap (Even in software)

<a class="button button--primary button--rounded button--xs" href="">CONS</a> Not very robust (Weak error detection guarantees)

Easy to cheat, with as few as 2 bit errors. eg If 1 bit error adds 16 and another substracts 16, the checksum won't catch the error. 

## CRC

Computes remainder of a polynomial (Ethernet)

<a class="button button--success button--rounded button--xs" href="">PROS</a> More robust, protects against any 2 bit error

<a class="button button--primary button--rounded button--xs" href="">CONS</a> More expensive in computation terms than checksum (Easy in HW)

Because robust CRCs are used at the Link Layer, in some sense the IP layer can get away with Checksums.

eg A CRC that is ***c*** bits long, can detect any 1, 2 bit errors, any burst ***≤ c***, any odd number of errors.

## MAC

Cryptographic transformation of data (TLS)

<a class="button button--success button--rounded button--xs" href="">PROS</a> Robust to malicious modifications

<a class="button button--primary button--rounded button--xs" href="">CONS</a> Not so robust to errors

MAC is not as good as CRC